implementations.md, before:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python3
---
```{important}
Page under development (2025-03-12)
```
# Available solutions
This page references smart-microscopy implementations for different manufacturers and academic labs.

## Academic implementations
```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1
* - Project overview
  - Repo
  - Institution
  - Contact
* - [Automated optogenetic targeting](./implementations/academic/unibe.md)
  - https://github.com/hinderling/rtm-pymmcore
  - [UNIBE](https://www.izb.unibe.ch/research/prof_dr_olivier_pertz/index_eng.html)
  - [Lucien Hinderling](mailto:lucien.hinderling@unibe.ch)
* - Re-usable workflows on different microscope brands
  -
  - EMBL-ALMF
  - 
* - [Outcome-driven microscopy to guide cell biology](./implementations/academic/uu.md)
  - https://github.com/UU-cellbiology/UU_SmartMicroscopy
  - [UU](https://cellbiology.science.uu.nl/research-groups/lukas-kapitein-biophysics/)
  - [Alfredo Rates](mailto:a.ratessoriano@uu.nl)
* - [Smart Microscopy as a Service](./implementations/academic/cci-ug.md)
  - 
  - [CCI-UG](https://www.gu.se/en/core-facilities/infrastructure-at-core-facilities/centre-for-cellular-imaging)
  - [Rafael Calacho](./members/profiles/CamachoR.md)
```

## Industry implementations
```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
* - Product overview
  - [GitHub](https://github.com/Luxendo/Acquifer-Python-API/tree/master/examples/prescreen_rescreen)
  - LUXENDO
  - [Thomas Laurent](./members/profiles/ThomasL.md)
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
```

## Hardware Compatibility Matrix

```{include} implementations/_compatibility_hardware.md
```

## Software Compatibility Matrix

```{include} implementations/_compatibility_software.md
```

Commit message:

content changes to the available implementations

implementations.md, after:

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  name: python3
---
```{important}
Page under development (2025-03-12)
```
# Available implementations
This page references smart-microscopy implementations for different manufacturers and academic labs.

## Academic implementations
```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1
* - Project overview
  - Repo
  - Institution
  - Contact
* - [Automated optogenetic targeting](./implementations/academic/unibe.md)
  - https://github.com/hinderling/rtm-pymmcore
  - [UNIBE](https://www.izb.unibe.ch/research/prof_dr_olivier_pertz/index_eng.html)
  - [Lucien Hinderling](mailto:lucien.hinderling@unibe.ch)
* - Re-usable workflows on different microscope brands
  -
  - EMBL-ALMF
  - 
* - [Outcome-driven microscopy to guide cell biology](./implementations/academic/uu.md)
  - https://github.com/UU-cellbiology/UU_SmartMicroscopy
  - [UU](https://cellbiology.science.uu.nl/research-groups/lukas-kapitein-biophysics/)
  - [Alfredo Rates](mailto:a.ratessoriano@uu.nl)
* - [Smart Microscopy as a Service](./implementations/academic/cci-ug.md)
  - 
  - [CCI-UG](https://www.gu.se/en/core-facilities/infrastructure-at-core-facilities/centre-for-cellular-imaging)
  - [Rafael Calacho](./members/profiles/CamachoR.md)
```

## Industry implementations
```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
* - Product overview
  - [GitHub](https://github.com/Luxendo/Acquifer-Python-API/tree/master/examples/prescreen_rescreen)
  - [LUXENDO](https://www.bruker.com/en/products-and-solutions/fluorescence-microscopy/light-sheet-microscopes.html)
  - [Thomas Laurent](./members/profiles/ThomasL.md)
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
* - Product overview
  - Repo
  - Brand
  - Contact
```

## Hardware / Software compatibility
These tables provide a more general overview, also linking to projectes not yet represented in the working group.
An overview of relevant software can also be found here: https://smartmicroscopy.org/resources/ 


### Hardware compatibility matrix

```{include} implementations/_compatibility_hardware.md
```

### Software compatibility matrix

```{include} implementations/_compatibility_software.md
```
